{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl340\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs30 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
THE ROLE OF MONETARY POLICY\

\fs22 MILTON FRIEDMAN
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 There is wide agreement about the major goals of economic policy: high employment, stable prices, and rapid growth. There is less agree- ment that these goals are mutually compatibleor, among those who re- gard them as incompatible, about the terms at which they can and should be substituted for one another. There is least agreement about the role that various instruments of policy can and should play in achieving the several goals. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 My topic for tonight is the role of one such instrument-monetary policy. What can it contribute? And how should it be conducted to con- tribute the most? Opinion on these questions has fluctuated widely. In the first flush of enthusiasm about the newly created Federal Reserve System, many observers attributed the relative stability of the 1920s to the System's capacity for fine tuning-to apply an apt modern term. It came to be widely believed that a new era had arrived in which busi- ness cycles had been rendered obsolete by advances in monetary tech- nology. This opinion was shared by economist and layman alike, though, of course, there were some dissonant voices. The Great Con- traction destroyed this naive attitude. Opinion swung to the other ex- treme.Monetarypolicywasastring.Youcouldpullonittostopinfla- tion but you could not push on it to halt recession. You could lead a horse to water but you could not make him drink. Such theory by aphorism was soon replaced by Keynes' rigorous and sophisticated analysis. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 Keynes offered simultaneously an explanation for the presumed im- potence of monetarypolicy to stem the depression,a nonmonetaryin- terpretation of the depression, and an alternative to monetary policy 
\b0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl260\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b\fs22 \cf0 \up5 * \up0 Presidential address delivered at the Eightieth Annual Meeting of the American Eco- nomic Association, Washington, D.C., December 29, 1967. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs22 ** I am indebted for helpful criticisms of earlier drafts to Armen Alchian, Gary \dn3 Becker, \up0 Martin Bronfenbrenner, Arthur F. Burns, Phillip Cagan, David D. Friedman, Lawrence Harris, Harry G. Johnson, Homer Jones, Jerry Jordan, David Meiselman, Allan H. Meltzer, Theodore W. Schultz, Anna J. Schwartz, Herbert Stein, George J. Stigler, and James Tobin. 
\b0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl340\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b\fs30 \cf0 2 THE AMERICANECONOMICREVIEW 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 for meeting the depression and his offeringwas avidly accepted. If li- quidity preference is absolute or nearly so-as Keynes believed likely in times of heavy unemployment-interest rates cannot be lowered by monetary measures. If investment and consumption are little affected by interest rates-as Hansen and many of Keynes' other Americandis- ciples came to believe-lower interest rates, even if they could be \dn3 achieved, \up0 would do little good. Monetary policy is twice damned. The contraction, set in train, on this view, by a collapse of investment or by a shortage of investment opportunitiesor by stubborn thriftiness, could not, it was argued, have been stopped by monetary measures. But there was available an alternative-fiscal policy. Governmentspending could make up for insufficientprivate investment. Tax reductions could un- dermine stubborn thriftiness. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 The wide acceptance of these views in the economics profession meant that for some two decades monetary policy was believed by all but a few reactionarysouls to have been renderedobsolete by new eco- nomic knowledge. Money did not matter. Its only role was the minor one of keeping interest rates low, in order to hold down interest pay- ments in the government budget, contribute to the "euthanasia of the rentier," and maybe, stimulate investment a bit to assist government spendingin maintaininga high level of aggregatedemand. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 These views produced a widespread adoption of cheap money poli- cies after the war. And they received a rude shock when these policies failed in country after country, when central bank after central bank was forced to give up the pretense that it could indefinitely keep "the" rate of interest at a low level. In this country, the public denouement came with the Federal Reserve-TreasuryAccord in 1951, although the policy of pegging government bond prices was not formally abandoned until 1953. Inflation, stimulated by cheap money policies, not the widely heralded postwar depression, turned out to be the order of the day. The result was the beginning of a revival of belief in the potency of monetarypolicy. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 This revival was strongly fostered among economists by the theoreti- cal developments initiated by Haberler but named for Pigou that pointed out a channel-namely, changes in wealth-whereby changes in the real quantity of money can affect aggregate demand even if they do not alter interest rates. These theoretical developments did not un- dermine Keynes' argument against the potency of orthodox monetary measures when liquidity preference is absolute since under such cir- cumstances the usual monetary operations involve simply substituting money for other assets without changing total wealth. But they did show how changes in the quantity of money produced in other ways could affect total spending even under such circumstances. \dn3 And, \up0 more 
\b0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 FRIEDMAN: MONETARY POLICY 3 
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl340\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b\fs30 \cf0 fundamentally, they did undermine Keynes' key theoretical proposi- tion, namely, that even in a world of flexible prices, a position of equi- librium at full employment might not exist. Henceforth, unemployment had again to be explained by rigidities or imperfections,not as the nat- uraloutcomeof a fully operativemarketprocess. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 The revival of belief in the potency of monetary policy was fostered also by a re-evaluation of the role money played from 1929 to 1933. Keynes and most other economists of the time believed that the Great Contractionin the United States occurreddespite aggressive expansion- ary policies by the monetary authorities-that they did their best but their best was not good enough.' Recent studies have demonstrated that the facts are precisely the reverse: the U.S. monetary authorities followed highly deflationary policies. The quantity of money in the United States fell by one-third in the course of the contraction. And it fell not because there were no willing borrowers-not because the horse would not drink. It fell because the Federal Reserve System forced or permitted a sharp reduction in the monetary base, because it failed to 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 exercise the responsibilitiesassigned to it in the Federal Reserve Act to provide liquidity to the banking system. The Great Contraction is tragic testimony to the power of monetary policy-not, as Keynes and so many of his contemporariesbelieved, evidence of its impotence. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 In the United States the revival of belief in the potency of monetary policy was strengthened also by increasing disillusionment with fiscal policy, not so much with its potential to affect aggregate demand as with the practical and political feasibility of so using it. Expenditures turned out to respond sluggishly and with long lags to attempts to ad- just them to the course of economic activity, so emphasis shifted to taxes. But here political factors entered with a vengeance to prevent prompt adjustment to presumed need, as has been so graphically illus- trated in the months since I wrote the first draft of this talk. "Fine tun- ing" is a marvelously evocative phrase in this electronic age, but it has little resemblanceto what is possible in practice-not, I might add, an unmixed evil. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 It is hard to realize how radical has been the change in professional opinion on the role of money. Hardly an economist today accepts views that were the common coin some two decades ago. Let me cite a few examples. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 In a talk published in 1945, E. A. Goldenweiser,then Director of the Research Division of the Federal Reserve Board, described the pri- mary objective of monetary policy as being to "maintainthe value of 
\fs26 Government bonds.... This country" he wrote, "will have to adjust to 
\b0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl260\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b\fs22 \cf0 'In [2], \up5 I \up0 have argued that Henry Simons shared this view with Keynes, and that it accounts for the policy changes that he recommended. 
\b0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 4 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl340\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b\fs30 \cf0 a 
\fs18 212 
\fs30 per cent interest rate as the return on safe, long-time money, be- cause the time has come when returns on pioneering capital can no longerbe unlimitedas they were in the past" [4, p. 117]. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 In a book on Financing American Prosperity, edited by Paul Homan and Fritz Machlup and published in 1945, Alvin Hansen devotes nine pages of text to the "savings-investmentproblem" without finding any need to use the words "interest rate" or any close facsimile thereto \dn3 [5, \up0 pp. 218-27]. In his contribution to this volume, Fritz Machlup \dn3 wrote, \up0 "Questions regarding the rate of interest, in particular regarding its variation or its stability, may not be among the most vital problems of the postwar economy, but they are certainly among the perplexing ones" [5, p. 466]. In his contribution, John H. Williams-not only professor at Harvard but also a long-time adviser to the New York Federal Reserve Bank- wrote, "I can see no prospect of revival of a general monetary control in the postwar period" [5, p. 383]. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 Another of the volumes dealing with postwar policy that appeared at this time, Planning and Paying for Full Employment, was edited by AbbaP.LernerandFrankD.Graham\dn3 [6]\up0 andhadcontributorsofall shades of professional opinion-from Henry Simons and Frank Gra- ham to Abba Lerner and Hans Neisser. Yet Albert Halasi, in his excel- lent summaryof the papers,was able to say, "Ourcontributorsdo not 
\fs26 discuss the question of money supply. 
\fs18 . . 
\fs26 . The contributors make no 
\fs30 special mention of credit policy to remedy actual depressions.... Infla- tion ... might be fought more effectively by raising interest rates.... 
\fs26 But . . . other anti-inflationary measures . . . are preferable" [6, pp. 
\fs30 23-24]. A Survey of ContemporaryEconomics, edited by Howard Ellis and published in 1948, was an "official"attempt to codify the state of economic thought of the time. In his contribution, Arthur Smithies wrote, "In the field of compensatory action, I believe fiscal policy must shoulder most of the load. Its chief rival, monetary policy, seems to be disqualified on institutional grounds. This country appears to be com- mitted to something like the present low level of interest rates on a long-termbasis" \dn3 [1, \up0 p. 208\dn3 ]. 
\b0\fs24 \up0 \

\b\fs30 These quotations suggest the flavor of professional thought some two decades ago. If you wish to go further in this humbling inquiry, I rec- ommend that you compare the sections on money-when you can find them-in the Principles texts of the early postwar years with the lengthy sections in the current crop even, or especially, when the early and recent Principles are different editions of the same work. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 The pendulum has swung far since then, if not all the way to the po- sition of the late \dn3 1920s, \up0 at least much closer to that position than to the position of 1945. There are of course many differences between then and now, less in the potency attributed to monetary policy than in the 
\b0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 FRIEDMAN: MONETARY POLICY \up2 5 
\b0 \up0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl340\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b\fs30 \cf0 roles assigned to it and the criteria by which the profession believes monetarypolicy should be guided. Then, the chief roles assigned mone- tary policy were to promote price stability and to preserve the \up2 gold \dn3 standard; \up0 the chief criteria of monetary policy were the state of \up2 the \up0 "money market," the extent of "speculation" and the movement \up2 of \dn3 gold. \up0 Today, primacy is assigned to the promotion of full employment, with the prevention of inflation a continuing but definitely secondary objective. And there is major disagreement about criteria of policy, varyino from emphasis on money market conditions, interest rates, and the quantity of money to the belief that the state of employment itself shouldbe the proximatecriterionof policy. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 I stress nonetheless the similarity between the views that prevailed \up2 in \up0 the late 'twenties and those that prevail today because I fear that, now as then, the pendulummay well have swung too far, that, now as then, we are in danger of assigning to monetary policy a larger role than \up2 it \up0 can perform, in danger of asking it to accomplish tasks that it cannot achieve, and, as a result, in danger of preventing it from making \up2 the \up0 contributionthat it is capable of making. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 Unaccustomed as I am to denigrating the importance of money, \up2 I \up0 therefore shall, as my first task, stress what monetary policy cannot \up2 do. \up0 I shall then try to outline what it can do and how it can best make \up2 its \up0 contribution, in the present \up2 state of our \up0 knowledge-or ignorance. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 I. What Monetary Policy Cannot Do 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 From the infinite world of negation, I have selected two \up2 limitations \up0 of monetarypolicy to discuss: (1) It cannot peg interest rates for more than very limited periods; (2) It cannot peg the rate of unemployment for more than very limited periods. I select these because the \up2 contrary \up0 has been or is widely believed, because they correspondto the two \up2 main \up0 unattainable tasks that are at all likely to be assigned to monetary \up2 pol- \dn3 icy, and \up0 because essentially the same theoretical analysis covers \up2 both. 
\b0\fs24 \up0 \

\b\fs30 Pegging of Interest Rates 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 History has already persuaded many of you \up2 about the first limita- \up0 tion. As noted earlier, the failure of cheap money policies was \up2 a \up0 major source of the reaction against simple-minded Keynesianism. \up2 In the \up0 United \dn3 States, \up0 this reaction involved widespread recognition that \up2 the \up0 wartime and postwar pegging of bond prices \up2 was a \up0 mistake, \up2 that the \dn3 abandonment \up0 of this policy was a desirable and inevitable step, \up2 and \dn3 that \up0 it hiadnone of the disturbing and disastrous consequences \up2 that \up0 were so freely predicted \up2 at the time. 
\b0\fs24 \up0 \

\b\fs30 \dn3 The li'mitation\up0 derives from a much misunderstoodfeature of the \up2 re- \dn3 lation between money \up0 and interest rates. Let the Fed set out to keep 
\b0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b\fs26 \cf0 6 THE AMERICANECONOMICREVIEW 
\b0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl340\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b\fs30 \cf0 interest rates down. How will it try to do so? By buying securities. This raises their prices and lowers their yields. In the process, it also increases the quantity of reserves available to banks, hence the amount of bank credit, \dn3 and, \up0 ultimately the total quantity of money. That is why central bankers in particular, and the financial community more broadly, generally believe that an increase in the quantity \up2 of \up0 money tends to lower interest rates. Academic economists accept the same conclusion, but for different reasons. They see, in their mind's \dn3 eye, \up0 a negatively sloping liquidity preference schedule. How can people be induced to hold a larger quantity of money? Only by bidding down interest rates. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 Both are right, up to a point. The initial impact of increasing the quantity of money at a faster rate than it has been increasing is to make interest rates lower for a time than they would otherwise \up2 have \up0 been. But this is only the beginning of the process not the end. The more rapid rate of monetary growth will stimulate spending, both through the impact on investment of lower market interest rates and through the impact on other spending and thereby relative prices of higher cash balances than are desired. But one man's spending is an- other man's income. Rising income will raise the liquidity preference schedule and the demand for loans; it may also raise prices, which would reduce the real quantity of money. These three effects will reverse the initial downward pressure on interest rates fairly prompt- ly, say, in something less than a year. Together they will tend, after a somewhat longer \dn3 interval, \up0 say, a year or two, to return interest rates to the level they would otherwise have had. Indeed, given the ten- dency for the economy to overreact, they are highly likely to raise in- terest rates temporarily beyond that level, setting in motion a cyclical adjustmentprocess. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 A fourth \dn3 effect, \up0 when and if it becomes operative, will go even far- ther, and definitely mean that a higher rate of monetary expansion will correspond to a higher, not lower, level of interest rates than would otherwise have prevailed. Let the higher rate of monetary growth pro- duce rising prices, and let the public come to expect that prices will continue to rise. Borrowerswill then be willing to pay and lenders will then demand higher interest rates-as Irving Fisher pointed out dec- ades ago. This price expectation effect is slow to develop and also slow to disappear.Fisher estimated that it took several decades for a full ad- justment and more recent work is consistent with his estimates. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 These subsequent effects explain why every attempt to keep interest rates at a low level has forced the monetary authority to engage in suc- cessively larger and larger open market purchases. They explain why, historically, high and rising nominal interest rates have been associated 
\b0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0

\b\fs30 \cf0 FRIEDMAN:MONETARYPOLICY 7 
\b0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl340\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b\fs30 \cf0 with rapid growth in the quantity of money, as in Brazil or Chile or in the United States in recent years, and why low and falling interest rates have been associated with slow growth in the quantity of money, as in Switzerlandnow or in the United States from 1929 to 1933. As an empiricalmatter, low interest rates are a sign that monetarypolicy has been tight-in the sense that the quantity of money has grown slowly; high interest rates are a sign that monetary policy has been easy-in the sense that the quantity of money has grown rapidly. The broadest facts of experience run in precisely the opposite direction from that whichthe financialcommunityand academiceconomistshave all gener- ally taken for granted. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 Paradoxically, the monetary authority could assure low nominal rates of interest-but to do so it would have to start out in what seems like the opposite direction, by engaging in a deflationary monetary policy. Similarly, it could assure high nominal interest rates by engaging in an inflationary policy and accepting a temporary movement in interest rates in the opposite direction. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 These considerations not only explain why monetary policy cannot peg interest rates; they also explain why interest rates are such a mis- leading indicator of whether monetary policy is "tight" or "easy." For that, it is far better to look at the rate of change of the quantity of 
\b0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 money.'\uc0\u8232 
\fs30 Employmentas a Criterionof Policy 
\b0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl340\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b\fs30 \cf0 The second limitation I wish to discuss goes more against the grain of current thinking. Monetary growth, it is widely held, will tend to stimulate employment; monetary contraction, to retard employment. Why, then, cannot the monetary authority adopt \up2 a \up0 target for employ- ment or unemployment-say, 3 per cent unemployment; be tight when unemploymentis less than the target; be easy when unemploymentis higher than the target; and in this way peg unemployment at, say, 3 per cent? The reason it cannot is precisely the same as for interest rates-the difference between the immediate and the delayed conse- 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 quences of such a policy.\uc0\u8232 Tlhanks to Wicksell, we are all acquainted with the concept of a 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 "natural"rate of interest and the possibility of a discrepancy between the "natural"and the "market"rate.The precedinganalysis of interest rates can be translated fairly directly into Wickse]lian terms. The mon- etary authority can make the market rate less than the natural rate 
\b0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl120\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b\fs10 \cf0 \up5 2 
\fs24 \up0 Thisispartlyanempiricalnottheoreticaljudgment.Inprinciple,"tightness"or"ease" dependson the rate of changeof the quantity of money suppliedcomparedto the rate \up2 of \up0 changeof the quantitydemandedexcludingeffectson demandfrommonetarypolicyitself. However,empiricallydemand\up2 is \up0 highlystable,if we excludethe effect\up2 of \up0 monetarypolicy, so it is generallysufficiento look at supplyalone. 
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl340\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b\fs30 \cf0 8 THE AMERICANECONOMICREVIEW 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 only by inflation. It can mnakethe market rate higher than the natural rate only by deflation. We have added only one wrinkle to Wicksell- the Irving Fisher distinction between the nominal and the real rate of interest. Let the monetary authority keep the nominalmarket rate for a time below the natural rate by inflation. That in turn will raise the nominal natural rate itself, once anticipations of inflation become wide- spread, thus requiring still more rapid inflation to hold down the mar- ket rate. Similarly, because of the Fisher effect, it will require not merely deflation but more and more rapid deflation to hold the market rate above the initial "natural"rate. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 This analysis has its close counterpartin the employment market. At any moment of time, there is some level of unemploymentwhich has the property that it is consistent with equilibrium in the structure of real wage rates. At that level of unemployment, real wage rates are tending on the average to rise at a "normal"secular rate, \dn3 i.e., \up0 at a rate that can be indefinitely maintained so long as capital formation, tech- nological improvements,etc., remain on their long-run trends. A lower level of unemploymentis an indication that there is an excess demand for labor that will produce upward pressure on real wage rates. \up2 A \up0 higher level of unemployment is an indication that there is an excess supply of labor that will produce downward pressure on real wage rates. The "natural rate of unemployment,"in other words, is the level that would be ground out by the Walrasian system of general equilib- rium equations, provided there is imbedded in them the actual struc- tural characteristics of the labor and commodity markets, including market imperfections, stochastic variability in demands and supplies, the cost of gathering information about job vacancies and labor avail- abilities, the costs of mobility, and 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 You will recognize the close similarity between this statement and the celebrated Phillips Curve. The similarity is not coincidental. \up2 Phil- \up0 lips' analysis of the relation between unemploymentand wage change \up2 is \up0 deservedly celebrated as an important and original \up2 contribution. \up0 But, unfortunately, it contains a basic defect-the failure to distinguish \up2 be- \dn3 tween \up0 nominal wages and real wages-just as Wicksell's analysis \up2 failed \dn3 to distinguish \up0 between nominal interest rates and real interest \up2 rates. \dn3 Implicitly, \up0 Phillips wrote his article for a world in which everyone \up2 an- \dn3 ticipated \up0 that nominal prices would be stable and in which that \up2 antici- \dn3 pation \up0 remainedunshakenandimmutablewhateverhappenedto \up2 actual \up0 prices and wages. Suppose, by contrast, \up2 that \up0 everyone anticipates \up2 that \dn3 prices \up0 will rise at a rate of more than 75 per cent a year-as, for \up2 exam- 
\b0\fs24 \up0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 \dn3 3It \up0 is \dn3 perhaps\up0 worth noting that this "natural"rate need not correspondto equality \dn3 between\up0 the numberunemployedand the numberof job vacancies.For any given \up2 structure \up0 of\dn3 the\up0 labor\dn3 mnarke\up0 th\dn3 ,\up0 erewillbesomeequilibriumrelationbetweenthesetwomagnitudes, but thereis no reasonwhy it shouldbe one of equality. 
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b\fs26 \cf0 FRIEDMAN: MONETARYPOLICY \up2 9 
\b0\fs24 \up0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl340\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b\fs30 \cf0 ple, Brazilians did a few years ago. Then wages must rise at that \up2 rate \up0 simply to keep real wages unchanged. An excess supply of \up2 labor will be \dn3 reflected \up0 in a less rapid rise in nominal wages than in anticipated prices,4not in an absolute decline in wages. When Brazil embarked \up2 on \up0 a \dn3 policy \up0 to bring down the rate of price rise, and succeeded in bringing \dn3 the price \up0 rise down to about 45 per cent a year, there was a sharp \up2 ini- \up0 tial rise in unemployment because under the influence of earlier \up2 antici- \up0 pations, wages kept rising at a pace that was higher than the new \up2 rate \up0 of price rise, though lower than earlier. This is the result experienced, and to be expected, of all attempts to reduce the rate of inflation \up2 below \up0 that widely anticipated.5 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 To avoid misunderstanding,let me emphasizethat by using the \up2 term \up0 "natural"rate of unemployment,I do not mean to suggest that it is \up2 im- \up0 mutable and unchangeable.On the contrary, many of the market \up2 char- \up0 acteristics that determine its level are man-made and policy-made. \up2 In \up0 the United States, for example, legal minimum wage rates, \up2 the Walsh- \up0 Healy and Davis-Bacon Acts, and the strength of labor unions all \up2 make \up0 the natural rate of unemployment higher than it would otherwise \up2 be. \up0 Improvementsin employmentexchanges,in availability of information about job vacancies and labor supply, and so on, would \up2 tend to lower \up0 the natural rate of unemployment. I use the term "natural" \up2 for the \up0 same reason Wicksell did-to try to separate the real forces from \up2 mon- \up0 etary forces. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 \dn3 Let \up0 us assume that the monetary authority tries to peg the \up2 "market" \dn3 rate \up0 of unemploymentat a level below the "natural"rate. For \up2 definite- \dn3 ness, \up0 suppose that it takes 3 per cent as the target \up2 rate and that the \dn3 "natural"rate \up0 is higher than 3 per cent. Suppose also that we start \up2 out \dn3 at a time when \up0 prices have been stable and when unemployment \up2 is \dn3 higher \up0 than 3 per cent. \dn3 Accordingly,\up0 the authority increases the rate \up2 of \up0 monetary growth. This will be expansionary. By making \up2 nominal cash 
\b0\fs24 \up0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl120\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b\fs10 \cf0 \dn3 4 
\fs22 \dn3 Strictly speaking, \up0 the rise in nominal wages will be less rapid than the rise in antici- \dn3 pated \up0 nominal wages to make allowance for any secular changes \up2 in real \up0 wages. 
\b0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl260\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b\fs22 \cf0 \dn3 'Stated \up0 in terms of the rate of change of nominal wages, the Phillips Curve can \up2 be \dn3 expected \up0 to \dn3 be \up0 reasonably stable and well defined for any period for which the average \dn3 rate of change \up0 of prices, and hence the anticipated rate, has been relatively \up2 stable. For \dn3 such periods, \up0 nominal wages and "real" wages move together. Curves computed for \up2 differ- \dn3 ent periods \up0 or different countries for each of which this condition has been satisfied \up2 will \up0 differ in \dn3 level, \up0 the level of the curve depending on what the average \up2 rate of \up0 price change \dn3 was. \up0 The \dn3 higher \up0 the average rate of price change, the higher will tend to be the level \up2 of \dn3 the \up0 curve. For \dn3 periods \up0 or countries for which the rate of change of prices varies \up2 consider- \dn3 ably, \up0 the \dn3 Phillips \up0 Curve will not be well defined. My impression is that these \up2 statements \dn3 accord \up0 reasonably well with the experience of the economists who \up2 have \up0 explored empirical Phillips Curves. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs22 \dn3 Restate Phillips' analysis \up0 in terms of the rate of change of real wages-and even \up2 more \dn3 precisely, anticipated \up0 real wages-and it all falls into place. That \up2 is \up0 why \up2 students of \dn3 empirical Phillips \up0 Curves have found that it helps to include the rate of change of \up2 the \up0 price level as an independent variable. 
\b0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl340\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b\fs30 \cf0 10 THE AMERICANECONOMICREVIEW 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 balances higher than people desire, it will tend initially to lower interest rates and in this and other ways to stimulate spending. Income and spendingwill start to rise. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 To begin with, much or most of the rise in income will take the form of an increase in output and employment rather than in prices. People have been expecting prices to be stable, and prices and wages have been set for some time in the future on that basis. It takes time for people to adjust to a new state of demand. Producers will tend to react to the initial expansion in aggregate demand by increasing \dn3 output, \up0 employees by working longer \dn3 hours, \up0 and the unemployed, by taking jobs now of- fered at former nominal wages. This much is pretty standard doctrine. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 But it describes only the initial effects. Because selling prices of products typically respond to an unanticipated rise in nominal demand faster than prices of factors of production, real wages received have gone down-though real wages anticipated by employees went up, since employees implicitly evaluated the wages offered at the earlier price level. Indeed, the simultaneous fall ex post in real wages to employers and rise ex ante in real wages to employees is what enabled employ- ment to increase. But the decline ex post in real wages will soon come to affect anticipations. Employees will start to reckon on rising prices of the things they buy and to demand higher nominal wages for the fu- ture. "Market"unemploymentis below the "natural"level. There is an excess demand for labor so real wages will tend to rise toward their ini- tial level. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 Even though the higher rate of monetary growth continues, the rise in real wages will reverse the decline in unemployment, and then lead to a rise, which will tend to return unemploymentto its formerlevel. In order to keep unemploymentat its target level of 3 per cent, the \up2 mone- \dn3 tary \up0 authority would have to raise monetary growth still more. As in the interest rate case, the "market"rate can be kept below the "natu- ral" rate onalyby inflation. And, as in the interest rate case, too, only by acceleratin(ginflation. Conversely, let the monetary authority choose a target rate of unemploymentthat is above the natural rate, and they will be led to produce a deflation, and an accelerating deflation at that. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 What if the monetary authority chose the "natural"rate-either of interest or unemployment-as its target? One problem is that it cannot know what the "natural" rate is. Unfortunately, we have as yet de- vised no method to estimate accurately and readily the natural rate of either interest or unemployment. And the "natural" rate will itself change from time to time. But the basic problem is that even if the monetary authority knew \up2 the "natural"\up0 rate, \up2 and \up0 attempted \up2 to \up0 peg \up2 the \up0 market rate at that level, it would not be led to a determinate policy. The "market"rate will vary from the natural rate for all sorts of rea- sons other than monetary policy. \up2 If \up0 the monetary authority responds to 
\b0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b\fs26 \cf0 FRIEDMAN:MONETARYPOLICY 
\fs24 II 
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl340\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b\fs30 \cf0 these variations, it will set in train longer term effects that will make any monetary growth path it follows ultimately consistent with the rule of policy. The actual course of monetary growth will be analogous to a random walk, buffeted this way and that by the forces that produce temporarydeparturesof the market rate from the natural rate. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 To state this conclusion differently, there is always a temporary trade-off between inflation and unemployment; there is no permanent trade-off.The temporarytrade-offcomes not from inflationper se, but from unanticipated inflation, which generally means, from a rising rate of inflation. The widespread belief that there is a perma ient trade-off is a sophisticated version of the confusion between "high" and "rising" that we all recognize in simpler forms. A rising rate of inflation may reduceunemployment,a high rate will not. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 But how long, you will say, is "temporary"?For interest rates, we have some systematic evidence on how long each of the several effects takes to work itself out. For unemployment,we do not. I can at most venture a personal judgment, based on some examination of the histori- cal evidence, that the initial effects of a higher and unanticipated rate of inflation last for something like two to five years; that this initial effect then begins to be reversed; and that a full adjustment to the new rate of inflation takes about as long for employment as for interest \dn3 rates, say, \up0 a couple of decades. For both interest rates and employment, let me add a qualification. These estimates are for changes in the rate of inflation of the order of magnitude that has been experienced in the United States. For much more sizable changes, such as those experi- enced in South American countries, the whole adjustment process is greatly speeded up. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 To state the generalconclusionstill differently,the monetaryauthor- ity controls nominal quantities-directly, the quantity of its own liabil- ities. In principle, it can use this control to peg a nominal quantity-an exchange rate, the price level, the nominal level of national income, the quantity of motneyby one or another definition-or to peg the rate of change in a nominal quantity-the rate of inflation or deflation, the rate of growth or decline in nominal national income, the rate of growth of the quantity of money. It cannot use its control over nominal quanti- ties to peg a real quantity-the real rate of \dn3 interest, \up0 the rate of unem- 
\fs26 ployment, the level of real national income, the real quantity of money, 
\fs30 the rate of growth of real national income, or the rate of growth of the real quantity of money. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 II. What Monetary Policy Can Do 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 Monetary policy cannot peg these real magnitudes at predetermined levels. But monetary policy can and does have important effects on these real magnitudes.The one is in no way inconsistentwith the other. 
\b0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 12 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl340\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b\fs30 \cf0 My own studies of monetary history have made me extremely sym- pathetic to the oft-quoted, much reviled, and as widely misunderstood, 
\fs26 comment by John Stuart Mill. "There cannot . 
\fs22 .. 
\fs24 ," 
\fs26 he wrote, "be in- 
\fs30 trinsically a more insignificant thing, in the economy of society, than money; except in the character of a contrivance for sparing time and labour. It is a machine for doing quickly and commodiously, what would be done, though less quickly and commodiously,without it: and like many other kinds of machinery,it only exerts a distinct and inde- pendent influence of its own when it gets out of order" [7, p. 488]. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 True, money is only a machine, but it is an extraordinarilyefficient machine. Without it, we could not have begun to attain the astounding growth in output and level of living we have experienced in the past two centuries-any more than we could have done so without those other marvelous machines that dot our countryside and enable us, for the most part, simply to do more efficientlywhat could be done without them at much greater cost in labor. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 But money has one feature that these other machines do not share. Because it is so pervasive, when it gets out of order, it throws a mon- key wrench into the operation of all the other machines. The Great Contraction is the most dramatic example but not the only one. Every other major contraction in this country has been either produced by monetarydisorderor greatly exacerbatedby monetarydisorder.Every major inflation has been produced by monetary expansion-mostly to meet the overriding demands of war which have forced the creation of money to supplementexplicit taxation. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 The first and most important lesson that history teaches about what monetary policy can do-and it is a lesson of the most profound impor- tance-is that monetary policy can prevent money itself from being a major source of economic disturbance. This sounds like a negative proposition: avoid major mistakes. In part it is. The Great Contraction might not have occurredat all, and if it had, it would have been far less severe, if the monetary authority had avoided mistakes, or if the mone- tary arrangementshad been those of an earlier time when there was no central authority with the power to make the kinds of mistakes that the 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 Federal Reserve System made. The past few years, to come closer to home, would have been steadier and more productive of economic well- being if the Federal Reserve had avoided drastic and erratic changes of direction, first expanding the money supply at an unduly rapid pace, then, in early 1966, stepping on the brake too hard, then, at the end of 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 1966, reversingitself and resumingexpansionuntil at least November, 1967, at a more rapid pace than can long be maintained without appre- ciable inflation. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 Even if the proposition that monetary policy can prevent money it- 
\b0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl340\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b\fs30 \cf0 FRIEDMAN:MONETARYPOLICY 13 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 self from being a major source of economic disturbance were a wholly negative proposition, it would be none the less important for that. As it happens, however, it is not a wholly negative proposition. The mone- tary machine has gotten out of order even when there has been no cen- tral authority with anything like the power now possessed by the Fed. In the United States, the 1907 episode and earlier banking panics are examples of how the monetary machine can get out of order largely on its own. There is therefore a positive and important task for the mone- tary authority-to suggest improvements in the machine that will re- duce the chances that it will get out of order, and to use its own powers so as to keep the machinein good workingorder. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 A second thing monetary policy can do is provide a stable back- groundfor the economy-keep the machinewell \dn3 oiled, \up0 to continueMill's analogy. Accomplishing the first task will contribute to this objective, but there is more to it than that. Our economic system will work best when producersand consumers,employers and employees, can proceed with full confidence that the average level of prices will behave in a known way in the future-preferably that it will be highly stable. Under any conceivable institutional arrangements,and certainly under 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 those that now prevail in the United States, there is only a limited amount of flexibility in prices and wages. We need to conserve this flexi- bility to achieve changes in relative prices and wages that are required to adjust to dynamic changes in tastes and technology. We should not dissipate it simply to achieve changes in the absolute level of prices that serve no economic function. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 In an earlier era, the gold standard was relied on to provide confi- dence in future monetary stability. In its heyday it served that function reasonably well. It clearly no longer does, since there is scarce a coun- try in the world that is prepared to let the gold standard reign un- checked-and there are persuasive reasons why countries should not do so. The monetary authority could operate as a surrogate for the gold standard, if it pegged exchange rates and did so exclusively by altering the quantity of money in response to balance of payment flows without "sterilizing" surpluses or deficits and without resorting to open or con- 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 cealed exchange control or to changes in tariffs and quotas. But again, though many central bankers talk this way, few are in fact willing to follow this course-and again there are persuasive reasons why they should not do so. Such a policy would submit each country to the va- garies not of an impersonaland automatic gold standardbut of the pol- icies-deliberate or accidental-of other monetary authorities. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 In today's world, if monetary policy is to provide a stable back- ground for the economy it must do so by deliberately employing its powers to that end. I shall come later to how it can do so. 
\b0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 14 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl340\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b\fs30 \cf0 Finally, monetary policy can contribute to offsetting major distur- bances in the economic system arising fromiother sources. If there is an independent secular exhilaration-as the postwar expansion was de- scribed by the proponents of secular stagnation-monetary policy can in principle help to hold it in check by a slower rate of monetary growth than would otherwise be desirable. If, as now, an explosive fed- eral budget threatens unprecedenteddeficits, monetary policy can hold any inflationary dangers in check by a slower rate of monetary growth than would otherwise be desirable. This will temporarily mean higher interest rates than would otherwise prevail-to enable the government toborrowthesumsneededtofinancethedeficit-but bypreventingthe speeding up of inflation, it may well mean both lower prices and lower nominal interest rates for the long pull. If the end of a substantial war offers the country an opportunity to shift resources from wartime to peacetime production, monetary policy can ease the transition by a higher rate of monetary growth than would otherwise be desirable- though experience is not very encouraging that it can do so without going too far. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 I have put this point \dn3 last, \up0 and stated it in qualified terms-as refer- ring to major disturbances-because I believe that the potentiality of monetary policy in offsetting other forces making for instability is far more limited than is commonly believed. We simply do not know enough to be able to recognize minor disturbanceswhen they occur or to be able to predict either what their effects will be with any precision or what monetary policy is required to offset their effects. We do not know enough to be able to achieve stated objectives by \dn3 delicate, \up0 or even fairly coarse, changes in the mix of monetary and fiscal policy. In this area particularly the best is likely to be the enemy of the good. Experi- ence suggests that the path of wisdom is to use monetary policy explic- itly to offset other disturbancesonly when they offer a "clear and pres- ent danger." 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 III. How Should Monetary Policy Be Conducted? 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 How should monetary policy be conducted to make the contribution to our goals that it is capable of making? This is clearly not the occa- sion for presenting a detailed "Program for Monetary Stability"-to use the title of a book in which I tried to do so [3]. I shall restrict myself here to two major requirementsfor monetary policy that follow fairly directly from the preceding discussion. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 The first requiremrenits that the monetary authority should guide it- self by magnitudes that it can control, not by ones that it cannot con- trol. If, as the authority has often done, it takes interest rates or the currentunemploymentpercentageas the immediatecriterionof policy, 
\b0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 FRIEDMAN: MONETARY POLICY 15 
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl340\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b\fs30 \cf0 it will be like a space vehicle that has taken a fix on the wrong star. No matter how sensitive and sophisticated its guiding apparatus, the space vehicle will go astray. And so will the monetary authority. Of the var- ious alternative magnitudes that it can control, the most appealing guides for policy are exchange rates, the price level as defined by some index, and the quantity of a monetary total-currency plus adjusted demand deposits, or this total plus commercialbank time deposits, or a still broadertotal. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 For the United States in particular, exchange rates are an undesira- ble guide. It might be worth requiring the bulk of the economy to ad- just to the tiny percentage consisting of foreign trade if that would guarantee freedom from monetary \dn3 irresponsibility-as \up0 it might under a real gold standard. But it is hardly worth doing so simply to adapt to the average of whatever policies monetary authorities in the rest of the world adopt. Far better to let the market, through floating exchange rates, adjust to world conditions the 5 per cent or so of our resources devoted to international trade while reserving monetary policy to pro- mote the effective use of the 95 per cent. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 Of the three guides listed, the price level is clearly the most impor- tant in its own right. Other things the same, it would be much the best of the alternatives-as so many distinguished economists have urged in the past. But other things are not the same. The link between the pol- icy actions of the monetary authority and the price level, while unques- tionably present, is more indirect than the link between the policy ac- tions of the authority and any of the several monetary totals. More- over, monetary action takes a longer time to affect the price level than to affect the monetary totals and both the time lag and the magnitude of effect vary with circumstances. As a result, we cannot predict at all accurately just what effect a particular monetary action will have \up2 on \up0 the price level and, equally important,just when it will have that effect. Attempting to control directly the price level is therefore likely to make monetary policy itself a source of economic disturbance because of 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 false stops and starts. Perhaps, as our understandingof monetary phe- nomena advances, the situation will change. But at the present stage of our understanding,the long way around seems the surer way to our ob- jective. Accordingly, I believe that a monetary total is the best cur- rently available immediate guLidoer criterion for monetary policy-and 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 I believe that it matters much less which particular total is chosen than that one be chosen. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 A second requirementfor monetary policy is that \up2 the \up0 monetary \up2 au- \up0 thority avoid sharp swings \up2 in \up0 policy. \up2 In the \up0 past, monetary \up2 authorities \up0 have on occasion moved in the wrong direction-as in the episode \up2 of \up0 the Great Contractionthat I have stressed. \up2 More \up0 frequently, they \up2 have 
\b0\fs24 \up0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl340\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b\fs30 \cf0 16 THE AMERICANECONOMICREVIEW 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 moved in the right direction, albeit often too late, but have erred by moving too far. Too late and too much has been the general practice. For example, in early 1966, it was the right policy for the Federal Re- serve to move in a less expansionary direction-though it should have done so at least a year earlier. But when it moved, it went too far, pro- ducing the sharpest change in the rate of monetary growth of the post- war era. Again, having gone too far, it was the right policy for the Fed to reverse course at the end of 1966. But again it went too far, not only restoring but exceeding the earlier excessive rate of monetary growth. And this episode is no exception. Time and again this has been the course followed-as in 1919 and 1920, in 1937 and 1938, in 1953 and 1954, in 1959 and 1960. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 The reason for the propensity to overreact seems clear: the failure of monetary authorities to allow for the delay between their actions and the subsequent effects on the economy. They tend to determine their actions by today's conditions-but their actions will affect the economy only six or nine or twelve or fifteen months later. Hence they feel im- pelled to step on the brake, or the accelerator, as the case may be, too hard. 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 My own prescription is still that the monetary authority go all the way in avoiding such swings by adopting publicly the policy of achiev- ing a steady rate of growth in a specified monetary total. The precise rate of growth, like the precise monetary total, is less important than the adoption of some stated and known rate. I myself have argued for a rate that would on the average achieve rough stability in the level of prices of final products, which I have estimated would call for some- thing like a 3 to 5 per cent per year rate of growth in currency plus all commercialbank deposits or a slightly lower rate of growth in currency plus demand deposits only.6 But it would be better to have a fixed rate that would on the average produce moderate inflation or moderate de- flation, provided it was \dn3 steady, \up0 than to suffer the wide and erratic per- 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 turbations we have experienced.\uc0\u8232 Short of the adoption of such a publicly stated policy of a steady 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 rate of monetary growth, it would constitute a major improvement if the monetary authority followed the self-denying ordinance of avoiding wide swings. It is a matter of record that periods of relative stability in the rate of monetary growth have also been periods of relative stability in economic \dn3 activity, \up0 both in the United States and other countries. Periods of wide swings in the rate of monetary growth have also been periodsof wide swings in economicactivity. 
\b0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl120\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b\fs10 \cf0 a 
\fs22 In an as yet unpublished article on "The Optimum Quantity of Money," I conclude that a still lower rate of growth, something like 2 per cent for the broader definition, might be better yet in order to eliminate or reduce the difference between \dn3 private \up0 and total costs of adding to real balances. 
\b0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl340\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b\fs30 \cf0 FRIEDMAN:MONETARYPOLICY 17 
\b0\fs24 \

\b\fs30 By setting itself a steady course and keeping to it, the monetary au- thority could make a major contribution to promoting economic stabil- ity. By making that course one of steady but moderate growth in the quantity of money, it would make a major contributionto avoidance of either inflation or deflation of prices. Other forces would still affect the economy, require change and adjustment,and disturb the even tenor of our ways. But steady monetary growth would provide a monetary cli- mate favorable to the effective operation of those basic forces of enter- prise, ingenuity, invention, hard work, and thrift that are the true springs of economic growth. That is the most that we can ask from monetary policy at our present stage of knowledge. But that much- and it is a great deal-is clearly within our reach. }